Good morning.
What's everybody doing?
You all have coffee
recovering from last night?
I'm still recovering from last night.
So this is Section 433.
We're going to talk about building
native look and feel web applications.
And really, we're not going to talk very
much today about building native
looking applications because,
right, that's pretty easy.
If you've ever used any kind of CSS,
you know much about CSS,
you can make your apps
on the web look native.
The hard thing is to create
applications that feel like
they're native applications,
even though they're
running in the web browser.
So that's what we're going
to really talk about today.
My name is Charles Jolly.
I'm a software architect
with the new MobileMe.
For the last couple years,
I've been working on,
along with a big group
of people at MobileMe,
creating the web applications that
you saw demoed in the keynote.
So we're going to talk a little
bit about how we actually did that.
And when we talk about creating
native look and feel applications
on the web-- what do we really mean?
Well, what we're talking about doing is
taking an application like this
that looks fundamentally like a
web page and seeing how we can make
this look and feel more like this,
right, iPhoto.
What would it take if we wanted to
create something like iPhoto on the web?
Is it even possible?
Well, it is.
And we're going to discuss how we
do that in four sections today.
We're going to talk about the
architecture a little bit.
And if you don't get anything
else out of this talk today,
the architecture section is really what--
I hope you'll walk away with the most.
Because understanding how to structure
these applications is really fundamental
to making it possible to create
something this great in the web browser.
Once you get your head around that,
we'll talk about a framework we've
been using for the last couple years to
create these applications on the web.
And then we'll actually build
one of these applications.
And then we'll talk a little bit about
how you can go about deploying these.
Because the actual deployment
methods that you use to put
this onto the server varies.
significantly once you start
dealing with this architecture.
So let's get started.
So, architecture.
What do we really mean when
we're talking about building a
native look-and-feel application?
How does that differ from a
desktop or from a typical web
application that you might see today?
Well,
I think it really comes in three pieces,
right?
First is we expect an immediate response.
When you click on something,
it should highlight.
When you edit some text,
it should be changed.
When you drag something to a folder,
it should be moved.
You shouldn't have to wait on
server round trips very often.
As much as possible,
you want the user to immediately see
the change that they've just made.
The second thing is we want,
and really connected with that first bit,
is a rich interaction experience.
You know, when the Mac first came out,
[Transcript missing]
So, how does this compare?
Well, obviously everything's
happening in the browser.
You can almost always give
an immediate response.
You rarely have to wait
on a server round trip.
You can implement really rich, dynamic,
interactive experiences.
You can give the user back the direct
manipulation that we lost with the web.
And, of course,
you can implement client-side
storage extremely easily,
and you can have this
complete offline mode capable,
depending on how you
built your applications.
So that's the web client
server architecture.
[Transcript missing]
So, before we get to SproutCore,
let's just compare this with
the current state of the art.
Now, Flickr is an extremely
advanced AJAX application,
3270 style.
So, I'm on my page here
with a couple of sets.
Let's say I want to come in
here and change this name.
Well, how do I do that?
Well, I can click on Edit,
and I have to go into another page,
and then this happened in 2006,
so I want to add that.
Well, that didn't actually change it.
If I come back here, oh, well,
I guess I actually have to
tell the server to do it.
So, I wait.
Okay, I changed.
So, not bad, but still,
everything interesting is
happening in the web browser,
right?
So, what happens if I want to, say,
create a new set and maybe move
a few of these photos from a
party we went to to another page?
Well, first thing I have to
do is come back here,
and actually, let's see here.
Come here to Sets.
I click Create a New Set.
Go to My New Set.
Now they do have some drag and drop,
which is great.
That's something that
Flickr is known for,
their advanced API.
Of course, I can't directly manipulate
the data in my other set,
because these are basically
happening in the web server,
so what I have to do is,
down here they show me all of my photos,
and I have about 200 of them on here.
So I'm going to have to slide
through here until I can
find the photos that I want.
They do have multiple select,
which is nice.
And that goes ahead
and adds some of them.
Just drag that last one up there.
OK.
call this the big party.
Of course this hasn't
actually changed anything.
If I come back here to sets,
again it will make me cancel that.
So I'm going to go ahead and save that.
Now wait on the server.
And there we go again.
So not bad,
it's a fairly fluid experience.
But we're still looking at this,
you know, fundamentally everything is
happening in the Web server and
most of the time I'm just looking
at a representation of my data.
So what could we do if we
built this with SproutCore?
Well, I'm going to show you this is
just a little demo we built.
This is available on
the SproutCore website.
And this is Photos.
So Photos has, you know,
a bunch of albums here.
These are just loading from the server.
Here's a few big ones.
You can see this one
has actually 150 photos.
And SproutCore has incremental
rendering built in,
which is the same thing Cocoa uses so
you can draw a large amount of sets.
We actually have done tests with this.
I've had 5,000 photos loading here
and it loads in about five seconds.
So that's actually faster than
iPhoto was a couple years ago.
So let's say we wanted to -- well,
we were going to do a couple things.
Let's say I wanted to rename
this to -- looks like I've
got a selection bug there.
Ignore the man behind the curtain.
So we'll just see what does it take
to actually change this to Canes 2006.
Well, I just click on it,
type 2006 and hit return.
Done.
So we're going to go ahead
and do a little bit of a test.
Maybe I want to select a couple,
well actually let's go
ahead and add a new set.
Just come down here,
I'll create a new set,
call it the big party.
We need to add a couple things to this.
So I can select these,
I can command select them,
I can shift select, I can, whoop,
hold the wrong key,
I can shift select them if I want to.
Of course,
I can also use keyboard control.
So it's all very natural,
and if I want to add it, I just go,
that's it.
I just added them.
Didn't have to wait on anything.
So, of course,
that makes using this app is way faster.
I mean,
you're never waiting on the server.
You wouldn't even know that this
was happening in the server.
In fact, a lot of what's going on
in the background here,
this can be communicating with
the server to update your photos.
It's also actually writing these
changes to local storage if you're
in the right version of Safari,
just as you go.
So you never have to wait on any of it.
And, of course,
we can do a lot more with this, right?
We can have a slider.
Isn't that nice?
It's really interactive.
Works pretty well if you have
a large number of photos even,
even though... And, by the way,
I've spent like a day on this guy.
So if you really want to be impressed,
buy MobileMe in a few weeks.
So, and, you know,
the other thing I mentioned
was Safari has some really cool
effects that they're doing.
And so why don't we come over here and
let's just see if we go ahead and add it.
And, um,
If we go ahead and I'm just going
to show all these photos and
we're going to do select all.
Okay, so what can we do with this?
Well, here's a little editor I've done.
Just a few things.
One thing you'll notice is the titles
are automatically selected and joined
here because we're using bindings.
It just noticed that
we have multiple ones.
So if I just instead select one here,
I can actually edit it and
say this guy was in Prague.
That's all I have to do.
It's done now.
But let's do some more
interesting things.
So the new Safari--
[Transcript missing]
So, just pretend that didn't happen.
So what happens if, let's say we want to,
Let's say we wanted to
reorder these guys over here.
Now, there was actually no really
obvious way to do that in Flickr.
Here, it's really easy.
You just grab it and drag it around.
That's all you have to do.
I can actually do the same
thing with my photo library.
I can just select a couple of these guys,
and let's say I want to move them down.
You can see the little highlighter.
And we've actually implemented
scrolling as you hit these edges,
which, believe it or not,
is extremely complicated in the web.
And we just let go, and it drops them.
I'll show you, move these up so it's a
little easier to tell.
Okay, so it's even awesomer in WebKit,
so let me show you WebKit really quick.
Notice how fast this is loading.
Just keep that in mind.
Stuff that in your back
pocket for a little later.
Okay, so let's go ahead.
I'm gonna create the big party.
Since we're running in
a different browser now.
And I'm just going to grab a couple of
these photos so you can kind of see this.
Okay, so as I was saying before,
I'm going to get these a little
bigger so you can see this.
So one of the cool things we have in
WebKit is this thing called CSS rotation,
which lets you rotate photos.
So what happens if we can
actually rotate photos in the web,
right?
It's pretty amazing.
But that's not the cool part.
The cool part is that this
is data living in the client,
okay?
So what I did here was I have a slider
that is bound to the rotation property on
a controller that's managing all three,
all of these photos.
And these photos actually
live in some other albums.
Remember, I just pulled them over
from the other albums.
So you see they're
already rotated there too.
So,
everything's pretty much handled for you.
So, that's the demo.
Now,
something I want to point out about this,
you saw how fast this was
loading and everything.
So, you know,
we got a little bit of press
with SproutCore on Monday.
It was mentioned on some websites
after the MobileMe thing.
And so, this is running on the
public SproutCore site.
And this site currently is hitting about,
it's getting 5,000 to 6,000 hits a day,
which is pretty high compared to
what it's normally been getting,
considering that it's running on
a 995 shared plan from DreamHost.
And so that performance is happening
on a shared plan on DreamHost,
which is huge, right?
Imagine what you can get.
I'll give you an example.
I launched a web company
a couple years ago.
We got on TechCrunch.
That's how we got mentioned here.
We got on TechCrunch
with my previous company,
and we had a server, you know,
very best server we could get.
It was hot off the presses.
It was running custom
software up and down,
and that mention on TechCrunch
nearly brought us to our knees,
right?
This guy is running on a shared plan,
and it's running smoothly
because everything's
happening in the web browser,
and it's so efficient at being
able to spread out the load
across all of your clients.
So you get not only some
really great features,
but even a little more difficult
to appreciate incredible amounts of
distribution of your application load,
which just, you know,
it does wonders for easing those
sleepless nights when you just put
your product out on the market.
So there you go.
So that's our demo for now.
[Transcript missing]
So let's look inside
the actual application.
Now,
there's a couple things you want to see.
If you're, you know,
model view controller world,
you'll see three very familiar folders.
You put your controllers and
models and views in those folders.
You can actually put
them anywhere you want,
and the system will take care of it.
This just makes it easier.
You have a file called core.js
where you define your namespace.
SproutCore helps you namespace
everything so you can have multiple
modules loaded at one time,
and it will all work.
You also have a main function
where your main function goes.
And there are a few other things.
This is the English lproj.
If you've done Cocoa development,
you recognize that lproj.
SproutCore has built-in
support for localization.
So you can put your HTML,
any images you want, any CSS.
If you have localized JavaScript,
in this example, we have a strings.js.
You drop them into this English lproj.
If you want to do a French localization,
you create a directory
called French lproj,
and you just add whatever
resources you want.
You can also create a
string.js for example.
You can localize your strings.
You can localize in any language.
SproutCore has built-in
support for these four,
but if you wanted to do anything else,
you just use the two-letter
language code lproj.
SproutCore will automatically
build and deploy it for you.
So MobileMe is localized because
we're Apple and we have to do that.
So we're using this system automatically.
So it's a really,
really nice way to handle localization,
which is generally pretty difficult.
We also have a couple
extra little features.
One of them is fixture data.
SproutCore actually supports fixtures.
You can load fake model data in here,
like photos, for example.
When I first wrote this app and I didn't
want to pull it from the server just yet,
I just write up my fake photo
JSON feed and I drop it into fixtures.
And when I'm in development mode,
it's automatically loaded and installed.
So you can work in fixtures
without having any server mode.
You also have unit
testing built right in,
which is huge because JavaScript is
extremely difficult to unit
test unless you're writing in
SproutCore and then it's easy.
. .
And now my colleague
Peter is going to come up,
Peter Bergstrom,
and show you how to build one of these.
All right, so we're going to build the
temperature converter application that
Charles just went over a little bit.
So the first thing we're going
to do is bring up Terminal and
use the SproutCore build tools to
create our converter application.
So this just builds the skeleton
of the application actually.
And this looks familiar from the slides.
And this is what we're going to modify.
So let's go into the converter
application and start SEServer.
So here we can take a
look at what it builds.
This is just the generic
page that we start with,
but let's actually
make this do something.
So we go into the body.rhtml here,
and we're going to
change this to font size.
Let's see how we do that.
Command plus.
Is that better?
All right.
OK.
So let's do this.
I'm just going to drop this in here.
So now we have some HTML.
And we use the Ruby helpers
here to create a text field.
It's going to be a text field view.
And we're going to name this one Celsius.
We can give it a hint.
So that'll just be ghost text that
will show up in the text field.
So, I'm going to go ahead and add
a new name here for Fahrenheit.
I'm going to drop in some CSS as well.
There it is.
Adding 20 pixels.
Add a border.
So we'll refresh this.
And now you can see here
that we have ghost text.
When we actually focus into the field,
it'll change.
And I noticed that I didn't change this.
There we go.
The next thing we want to do is
actually create a controller so we can
put our application logic in there.
So I'm going to go back in here.
We do SCGen to build the controller.
It's going to be a controller.
We're going to call
So this actually will create
a controllers directory
and a test directory.
We'll get back to a unit test later.
But the first thing we want to do is
add some values here in the controller,
one for F value, which is going to be
the Fahrenheit value,
and one for
So, we can go back to our text
field here and create a binding.
So, the binding will allow us to
bind the value of the text field
to the one in the controller.
So, if we do a change to the controller,
it will update automatically and
the other way around as well.
Fahrenheit value.
There.
So now you see that it says 2 and 32.
Those are the values we
put in the controller.
I'm going to bring up the error console,
and you can see here that we can actually
To set the value of, for example,
the C value to 300,
[Transcript missing]
We want to actually get a notification
so it actually won't change.
So we need to use set to actually
let everyone who is listening
to the value that it's changed.
So let's go back to the--
So,
we're going to create two functions here,
one to convert from Celsius to
Fahrenheit and one to
convert the other way.
So, the first one is going
to be convert C to F.
And this is actually going to be a
function that observes the value.
So when we change the
value in the text field,
this function will be
automatically executed.
So we're going to do observes cvalue.
So we're going to get the value.
Let's do our conversion.
Here, so it's going to be 9/5 plus 32.
And we're going to get the
original Fahrenheit value.
And since it's a floating point number,
we want to make-- we can't
just do a direct comparison and
see if it's actually changed.
So we're going to do math
absolute rig minus converted.
So just see if it's changed.
And if it has changed enough,
we're going to set the F value
here to the converted value.
And I'm just going to drop
in the other function here.
So we should be able to
now change the value here.
So as I'm typing, the Fahrenheit value
So now we actually have
a working converter,
but we don't really
know if it works right.
So let's build some unit tests.
So when I created the controller,
we actually also had a kind of a
basic unit test created for us.
So let's do some modifications here.
So it should convert
Celsius to Fahrenheit.
So I'm going to set the
value of the Celsius value.
To something we know, 100.
And then we can do converter, convert,
controller.
Get the Fahrenheit value,
because it's already supposedly changed,
and we can do should equal
And now we can bring this
up in the unit test suite.
And you see that our test passed.
So we can actually --
Another thing that's really great is that
we can turn on continuous integration.
So, this will run now in the background,
and I can just leave this minimized
and create another test here.
So, I'm going to grab this one.
Save it.
And whoops,
I actually did something wrong here.
So I actually caused a unit test
to fail because I tried to set
it to 100 degrees Fahrenheit.
That's not 212 degrees Celsius.
So it actually is 37.7.
So that failed.
So let's fix this.
And now it shows that
both of them have passed.
[Transcript missing]
So that's how you build
a SproutCore application.
There's another little feature
that you can find actually
documentation on the website.
We have built-in
documentation generation.
So if you saw in some of the code there,
there were some comments that said,
you know, place your documentation here.
You can put that in there
and then just visit,
just like there is a
built-in test runner,
there's also a built-in documentation
viewer that comes with every application.
You don't have to do anything.
You just add documents.
[Transcript missing]
So building this before
was really difficult,
but since Charles has done a
lot of work on the build tools,
it's been a lot simpler, more simple.
It's a lot more simple now.
So now we just do scbuild.
converter,
and we want to put some options here.
So R will make it only build the
required things like SproutCore and
Prototype as well as the Converter app.
And we'll make this verbose
so we can see what's going on.
So it'll build Prototype, SproutCore,
collect all the images,
and also our little very small app,
compared to everything else.
So it creates it in the temp directory.
So let's go inside there.
And just open that up.
So these are the things that are created.
The converter application and
the prototype and SproutCore.
So inside of here, you can actually see
that our index.html here,
the text fields or text field
views that we did in Ruby have
now turned into input fields.
And here are the bindings and the
hints that we specified for it.
So basically,
all the things that we do inside
of the RHTML with the Ruby help
will actually be automatically
converted into JavaScript for us.
So we don't actually have
to do anything with it.
And here's our minified code.
It's not very large.
And you can actually just go in here.
And this is what SproutCore looks like,
minified as well.
Now what we want to do is take this
and drop this into our web server.
So, we have a little bit of a break here,
and we can just go to this.
To local host, converter,
or static convert, oh, autocompleted.
So this is our wonderful deployed app.
And it just works the same way as the
one that we ran in the build environment,
but this is a lot faster to load because
we don't have to generate any of the
JavaScript or the files in real time
like we do in the build environment
or in the development environment.
So thank you.
[Transcript missing]